---
layout: article
title: "3. Going Digital: Re-Searching Connections Between Rosalba Carriera and British Grand Tourists"
author: Catherine Sama
session: 4
chapter: 6
abstract: The career of the Venetian artist Rosalba Carriera (1673-1757) was deeply intertwined with the eighteenth-century Grand Tour of Italy, and British travelers in particular played a vital and multifaceted role in the artist’s work life. In this essay, the search power of the Grand Tour Explorer is used in combination with primary sources to build a nuanced map of Carriera’s connections with these travelers. While there is no entry in the database for the Italian Carriera, searching the Explorer turns up a number of her British interlocutors, including famous and less well-known clients, acquaintances and friends, intermediaries and visitors to her studio. These search results bring new focus to some aspects of the artist’s career. Carriera’s role as a businesswoman is considered through her connections with other women in the Explorer, and her studio, both as a physical and a social space, is investigated through different travelers’ accounts of their visits.
references: 
about: 
editor_options: 
  markdown: 
    wrap: 72
---

The Venetian Rosalba Carriera (1673-1757) was one of the most important
female artists in Europe during the first half of the eighteenth century
(Figure 1). Her patrons included foreign collectors, artists, and
members of the clergy, as well as fellow Venetians and other Italians.
Royals across Europe sought her work: Frederick IV, King of Denmark;
Johann Wilhelm von der Platz, Elector Palatine; and Frederick Augustus
II, Prince-Elector of Saxony (also known as Augustus III, King of
Poland), who amassed over one hundred pastels by Carriera for a gallery
he dedicated to her in Dresden. Carriera's studio, which she maintained
in her home on the Grand Canal, was an important stop on the Grand Tour.
Her clients sought portraits of themselves, depictions of various types
of allegories, or portraits of Venetian women famous for their beauty or
musical talent.

British travelers were among her most numerous and devoted clients. One
of Carriera's most ardent supporters was Christian Cole (fl. 1697-1735,
travel years 1701-1705), secretary to the English Ambassador to Venice.
In a letter to the artist alerting her to the imminent arrival of Sir
Thomas Frankland (c. 1683-1747, travel years 1704-1705), Cole noted that
his compatriot, "would not like to pass through Venice without seeing
the Signora Rosalba [who is] justly esteemed an ornament of Italy, and
[the] premier painter of Europe." When traveling through Venice British
travelers also acted as couriers for the artist, ferrying letters,
books, pastel chalks and works of art between Carriera and other friends
and acquaintances; among these individuals who populate the Explorer, we
can count Cole, Frankland, and Thomas Turner (travel years 1704-1705).
Still others---Peter Philip Jamineau (travel years -1735-1745) and Owen
Swiney (1676-1754, travel years 1715-1732)---acted as agents for
Carriera, negotiating commissions and arranging for payment and
deliveries. In short, Carriera's career was tightly bound to the
transactional world of the Grand Tour, and British travelers
collectively played a vital and multifaceted role in the artist's work
life.

I came to the *Grand Tour Explorer* as a scholar of Rosalba Carriera,
whose correspondence I am currently co-translating and editing. With few
exceptions (including Cole), British clients and acquaintances are
mostly absent from this correspondence. I wondered what further
information the Explorer could offer about the artist and her
interactions with these individuals, beyond the connections already
widely established by art historians. This seemed a particularly
intriguing question because, as an Italian artist, Rosalba Carriera does
not have an entry in the richly detailed *A Dictionary of British and
Irish Travellers in Italy*, compiled from the Brinsley Ford Archive by
John Ingamells (1997). Consequently, information about Carriera cannot
be found in one easily identifiable place; instead, references to her
appear scattered throughout the entries of the *Dictionary*. The search
power of the *Explorer* made it easy to gather these references: one
inquiry using the 'Free Search' tool with the terms 'Rosalba' or
'Carriera' elicited 81 entries---a promising start to a more detailed
investigation. I decided to explore the database in tandem with
Carriera's correspondence, her work diary, and other primary sources to
confirm or clarify details about her British clients and to see if I
could discover new information. Pairing primary sources with the
database's digital search capability was powerful: in some cases it
allowed me to trace connections between Carriera and British clients
even when neither Carriera nor Venice were mentioned in the Explorer's
entries. In others, unexpected aggregations of travelers in the search
results produced new questions and ideas.
